Controlling locomotion with CPGs
================================

.. note::

    **Authors:** Sibo Wang-Chen, Femke Hurtak

    The code presented in this notebook has been simplified and
    restructured for display in a notebook format. A more complete and
    better structured implementation can be found in the `examples folder of
    the FlyGym repository on
    GitHub <https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/flygym/tree/main/flygym/examples/>`__.

    This tutorial is available in ``.ipynb`` format in the
    `notebooks folder of the FlyGym repository <https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/flygym/tree/main/notebooks>`_.

**Summary:** In this tutorial, we will introduce the concept of Central
Pattern Generators (CPGs) and build a CPG-based model to control walking
of the simulated fly.

Central Pattern Generators (CPGs) are neural circuits that generate
rhythmic output without receiving rhythmic input (see review of CPGs in
insects by `Mantziaris et al,
2020 <https://doi.org/10.1002/dneu.22738>`__). CPGs have been identified
in various species as playing a crucial role in locomotion. Their
principles have also been adopted in the realm of robotic motor control
(see review by `Ijspeert,
2008 <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2008.03.014>`__). It is
hypothesized that CPGs play a more important role in animals whose
locomotion is fast and therefore cannot process decentralized limb
sensory signals in time to adjust their movements (i.e., like
cockroaches running at ~1 m/s!).

In this tutorial, we will start by implementing an oscillator network.
Then, we will use this network to control the stepping of the legs by
mapping the phases of the oscillators to the phases of preprogrammed leg
stepping kinematics. Next, we will plug this oscillator-based controller
into NeuroMechFly to drive locomotion in the physics simulation.
Finally, we will add leg adhesion to the locomotor simulation.

The CPG network
---------------

Basic CPGs can be implemented as feedforward networks of oscillators—in
other words, the network behaves without taking into account sensory
feedback. Similar to the formulation from `Ijspeert et al
(2007) <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1138353>`__, the oscillator
network can be described by the following ordinary differential
equations (ODEs):

.. math::  \dot\theta_i = 2\pi\nu_i + \sum_{j} r_j w_{ij} \sin(\theta_j - \theta_i - \phi_{ij}) 

.. math::  \dot r_i = \alpha_i (R_i - r_i) 

where :math:`\theta_i` and :math:`r_i` are the current phase and
magnitude of the i-th oscillator. :math:`R_i` is the maximum amplitude
of the i-th oscillator, and :math:`\alpha_i` is a constant determining
the rate of convergence to synchrony. :math:`w_{ij}` is the coupling
weight between the i-th and the j-th oscillator, and :math:`\phi_{ij}`
is the phase bias between them. Intuitively, the first term of the first
equation maintains an intrinsic frequency for each oscillator; the
second term of the first equation keeps the oscillators synchronized
(i.e., maintains the phase differences between the oscillators), and the
second equation maintains the amplitudes of the oscillators.

To start, let’s write a function that computes :math:`\dot\theta` and
:math:`\dot r`. For explicitness, we will implement the CPG network
using only Python and NumPy (no ``scipy.integrate``).

.. code:: ipython3

    import numpy as np
    
    
    def calculate_ddt(theta, r, w, phi, nu, R, alpha):
        """Given the current state variables theta, r and network parameters
        w, phi, nu, R, alpha, calculate the time derivatives of theta and r."""
        intrinsic_term = 2 * np.pi * nu
        phase_diff = theta[np.newaxis, :] - theta[:, np.newaxis]
        coupling_term = (r * w * np.sin(phase_diff - phi)).sum(axis=1)
        dtheta_dt = intrinsic_term + coupling_term
        dr_dt = alpha * (R - r)
        return dtheta_dt, dr_dt

Next, let’s implement the CPG as a class. We will use `Euler’s
method <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euler_method>`__ to integrate the
ODE, but you can use any higher-order methods or libraries.

.. code:: ipython3

    class CPGNetwork:
        def __init__(
            self,
            timestep,
            intrinsic_freqs,
            intrinsic_amps,
            coupling_weights,
            phase_biases,
            convergence_coefs,
            init_phases=None,
            init_magnitudes=None,
            seed=0,
        ) -> None:
            """Initialize a CPG network consisting of N oscillators.
    
            Parameters
            ----------
            timestep : float
                The timestep of the simulation.
            intrinsic_freqs : np.ndarray
                The intrinsic frequencies of the oscillators, shape (N,).
            intrinsic_amps : np.ndarray
                The intrinsic amplitude of the oscillators, shape (N,).
            coupling_weights : np.ndarray
                The coupling weights between the oscillators, shape (N, N).
            phase_biases : np.ndarray
                The phase biases between the oscillators, shape (N, N).
            convergence_coefs : np.ndarray
                Coefficients describing the rate of convergence to oscillator
                intrinsic amplitudes, shape (N,).
            init_phases : np.ndarray, optional
                Initial phases of the oscillators, shape (N,). The phases are
                randomly initialized if not provided.
            init_magnitudes : np.ndarray, optional
                Initial magnitudes of the oscillators, shape (N,). The
                magnitudes are randomly initialized if not provided.
            seed : int, optional
                The random seed to use for initializing the phases and
                magnitudes.
            """
            self.timestep = timestep
            self.num_cpgs = intrinsic_freqs.size
            self.intrinsic_freqs = intrinsic_freqs
            self.intrinsic_amps = intrinsic_amps
            self.coupling_weights = coupling_weights
            self.phase_biases = phase_biases
            self.convergence_coefs = convergence_coefs
            self.random_state = np.random.RandomState(seed)
    
            self.reset(init_phases, init_magnitudes)
    
            # Check if the parameters have the right shape
            assert intrinsic_freqs.shape == (self.num_cpgs,)
            assert coupling_weights.shape == (self.num_cpgs, self.num_cpgs)
            assert phase_biases.shape == (self.num_cpgs, self.num_cpgs)
            assert convergence_coefs.shape == (self.num_cpgs,)
            assert self.curr_phases.shape == (self.num_cpgs,)
            assert self.curr_magnitudes.shape == (self.num_cpgs,)
    
        def step(self):
            """Integrate the ODEs using Euler's method."""
            dtheta_dt, dr_dt = calculate_ddt(
                theta=self.curr_phases,
                r=self.curr_magnitudes,
                w=self.coupling_weights,
                phi=self.phase_biases,
                nu=self.intrinsic_freqs,
                R=self.intrinsic_amps,
                alpha=self.convergence_coefs,
            )
            self.curr_phases += dtheta_dt * self.timestep
            self.curr_magnitudes += dr_dt * self.timestep
    
        def reset(self, init_phases=None, init_magnitudes=None):
            """Reset the phases and magnitudes of the oscillators.
            High magnitudes and unfortunate phases might cause physics error
            """
            if init_phases is None:
                self.curr_phases = self.random_state.random(self.num_cpgs) * 2 * np.pi
            else:
                self.curr_phases = init_phases
    
            if init_magnitudes is None:
                self.curr_magnitudes = np.zeros(self.num_cpgs)
            else:
                self.curr_magnitudes = init_magnitudes

To demonstrate this network, let’s simulate a network of three
oscillators connected as follows:

.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/cpg_controller/simple_cpg.png?raw=true
   :width: 500px

For the sake of illustration, let’s make them oscillate at an intrinsic
frequency of 1 and intrinsic amplitudes of 1.0, 1.1, 1.2. They are
coupled with a weight of 1 and phase differences of 120 degrees. We will
initialize the phases and magnitudes randomly.

.. code:: ipython3

    intrinsic_freqs = np.ones(3)
    intrinsic_amps = np.array([1.0, 1.1, 1.2])
    coupling_weights = np.array(
        [
            [0, 1, 0],
            [1, 0, 1],
            [0, 1, 0],
        ]
    )
    phase_biases = np.deg2rad(
        np.array(
            [
                [0, 120, 0],
                [-120, 0, 120],
                [0, -120, 0],
            ]
        )
    )
    convergence_coefs = np.ones(3)
    
    network = CPGNetwork(
        timestep=1e-3,
        intrinsic_freqs=intrinsic_freqs,
        intrinsic_amps=intrinsic_amps,
        coupling_weights=coupling_weights,
        phase_biases=phase_biases,
        convergence_coefs=convergence_coefs,
    )
    
    num_steps = int(10 / network.timestep)
    phase_hist = np.empty((num_steps, 3))
    magnitude_hist = np.empty((num_steps, 3))
    
    # Simulate the network
    for i in range(num_steps):
        network.step()
        phase_hist[i, :] = network.curr_phases
        magnitude_hist[i, :] = network.curr_magnitudes

We can visualize the phases (wrapped to :math:`[0, 2\pi]`) and the
magnitudes of the oscillators over time. We observe that, after a brief
period of synchronization, the oscillators converge to a state where
they oscillate 1/3 of a cycle apart at their intrinsic frequencies and
amplitudes.

.. code:: ipython3

    from pathlib import Path
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    
    output_dir = Path("./outputs/cpg_controller")
    output_dir.mkdir(exist_ok=True, parents=True)
    
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(5, 5), sharex=True)
    t = np.arange(num_steps) * network.timestep
    axs[0].plot(t, phase_hist % (2 * np.pi), linewidth=1)
    axs[0].set_yticks([0, np.pi, 2 * np.pi])
    axs[0].set_yticklabels(["0", r"$\pi$", r"$2\pi$"])
    axs[0].set_ylabel("Phase")
    axs[1].plot(t, magnitude_hist, linewidth=1)
    axs[1].set_ylabel("Magnitude")
    axs[1].set_xlabel("Time (s)")
    fig.savefig(output_dir / "simple_cpg_rollout.png")



.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/cpg_controller/simple_cpg_rollout.png?raw=true


We have now built a CPG network. In the next section, we address how the
states of the CPGs can be used to drive locomotion.

Controlling leg stepping with CPGs
----------------------------------

The state variables :math:`\theta` and :math:`r` can be used to drive
locomotion at various levels of abstraction. This is a design choice
that the modeler should make depending on the scientific question being
considered. For example, in `Lobato-Rios et al
(2022) <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-022-01466-7>`__, the CPG states
are used to calculate motor neuron activity
:math:`M_i = r_i (1 + \sin(\theta_i))`, which is in turn used to drive a
muscle model. By contrast, `Ijspeert et al
(2007) <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1138353>`__ uses a more abstract
control strategy — the CPG states directly control the target joint
*position* (i.e. angle) :math:`x_i = r_i (1 + \cos(\theta_i))`. This
target position is then provided to a `proportional-derivative (PD)
controller <https://www.matthewpeterkelly.com/tutorials/pdControl/index.html>`__
which actuates the joint.

Here, we will use an even higher-level control approach where each
oscillator controls the stepping of an entire leg (as opposed to a
joint). The phase of the CPG represents the phase of the step (i.e. how
far into the step the leg is), while the magnitude of the CPG represents
the magnitude of the step (i.e. how large the step is). We will use
experimentally recorded data to execute the individual steps. In other
words, we will extract the kinematics of a single step for each leg from
experimental behavior recordings and modify its magnitude (modulated by
:math:`r`) and speed (modulated by :math:`\theta`) so that the stepping
of the six legs is coordinated by the CPG network.

We will set the coupling parameters for locomotion using a “tripod
gait”: at each point in time, the fore and hind legs on one side and the
mid leg on the other side of the body are in stance, forming a stable
tripod-shaped structure; the other three legs are in swing. This is
illustrated in the figure below (left, figure adapted from `Emanuel et
al, 2020 <https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2020.00135>`__). The tripod gait
can be implemented using a CPG network shown on the right. We observe
that the legs that should *not* swing together are coupled with a phase
difference of 180 degrees, ensuring that they are out of phase once the
network is synchronized. We will use other parameters from the
`NeuroMechFly v2
paper <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41592-024-02497-y.epdf?sharing_token=jK2FbKWL99-O28WNqrpXWNRgN0jAjWel9jnR3ZoTv0MjiFZczOI3_5wYVxbEbClrTuJzjKyEfhm2kIwso489-ypEsSqlyasWAEsBCvR9WU5poT-q2bblI6hCc7Zji6wb_jZjfXl7KWLbd2pgZTmWvk_ADQ6RuzlnHwvQyipMJzg%3D>`__.


.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/cpg_controller/tripod_cpg.png?raw=true
   :width: 600px


As before, we will set up the CPG network, run the simulation, and plot
the time series of the state variables:

.. code:: ipython3

    intrinsic_freqs = np.ones(6) * 12
    intrinsic_amps = np.ones(6) * 1
    phase_biases = np.pi * np.array(
        [
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
        ]
    )
    coupling_weights = (phase_biases > 0) * 10
    convergence_coefs = np.ones(6) * 20
    
    network = CPGNetwork(
        timestep=1e-4,
        intrinsic_freqs=intrinsic_freqs,
        intrinsic_amps=intrinsic_amps,
        coupling_weights=coupling_weights,
        phase_biases=phase_biases,
        convergence_coefs=convergence_coefs,
    )
    
    # Simulate the network
    num_steps = int(1 / network.timestep)
    phase_hist = np.empty((num_steps, 6))
    magnitude_hist = np.empty((num_steps, 6))
    for i in range(num_steps):
        network.step()
        phase_hist[i, :] = network.curr_phases
        magnitude_hist[i, :] = network.curr_magnitudes
    
    # Visualize
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(5, 5), sharex=True)
    t = np.arange(num_steps) * network.timestep
    axs[0].plot(t, phase_hist % (2 * np.pi), linewidth=1)
    axs[0].set_yticks([0, np.pi, 2 * np.pi])
    axs[0].set_yticklabels(["0", r"$\pi$", r"$2\pi$"])
    axs[0].set_ylabel("Phase")
    axs[1].plot(t, magnitude_hist, linewidth=1)
    axs[1].set_ylabel("Magnitude")
    axs[1].set_xlabel("Time (s)")
    fig.savefig(output_dir / "tripod_cpg_rollout.png")



.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/cpg_controller/tripod_cpg_rollout.png?raw=true


Now, let’s load the behavior kinematics data:

.. code:: ipython3

    import pickle
    from flygym.util import get_data_path
    
    single_steps_path = (
        get_data_path("flygym", "data") / "behavior/single_steps_untethered.pkl"
    )
    with open(single_steps_path, "rb") as f:
        single_steps_data = pickle.load(f)

This gives us a dictionary containing joint angle time series for each
joint. We will check if they all have the same length. The steps should
be periodic, so we will also check if the first and last angles in the
time series are the same:

.. code:: ipython3

    preprogrammed_steps_length = len(single_steps_data["joint_LFCoxa"])
    preprogrammed_steps_timestep = single_steps_data["meta"]["timestep"]
    print(
        f"Preprogrammed steps have a length of {preprogrammed_steps_length} steps "
        f"at dt={preprogrammed_steps_timestep}s."
    )
    for k, v in single_steps_data.items():
        if k.startswith("joint_"):
            assert len(v) == preprogrammed_steps_length
            assert v[0] == v[-1]


.. parsed-literal::

    Preprogrammed steps have a length of 45 steps at dt=0.003s.


Now, for each leg :math:`i`, let’s build a function :math:`\Psi_i` such
that given the current stepping phase :math:`\theta_i` of the leg,
:math:`\Psi_i(\theta_i)` provides joint angles of all DoFs on leg
:math:`i` based on the preprogrammed stepping kinematics. We will do
this by interpolation and normalize :math:`\theta` to the range
:math:`[0, 2\pi)`:

.. code:: ipython3

    from scipy.interpolate import CubicSpline
    
    legs = [f"{side}{pos}" for side in "LR" for pos in "FMH"]
    dofs_per_leg = [
        "Coxa",
        "Coxa_roll",
        "Coxa_yaw",
        "Femur",
        "Femur_roll",
        "Tibia",
        "Tarsus1",
    ]
    phase_grid = np.linspace(0, 2 * np.pi, preprogrammed_steps_length)
    psi_funcs = {}
    for leg in legs:
        joint_angles = np.array(
            [single_steps_data[f"joint_{leg}{dof}"] for dof in dofs_per_leg]
        )
        psi_funcs[leg] = CubicSpline(phase_grid, joint_angles, axis=1, bc_type="periodic")

We can then map the phase of the CPGs to the phase of the legs. Let’s
visualize three stepping cycles for each leg:

.. code:: ipython3

    theta_ts = np.linspace(0, 3 * 2 * np.pi, 10000)
    
    joint_angles_by_leg = {}
    for leg, psi_func in psi_funcs.items():
        joint_angles_by_leg[leg] = psi_func(theta_ts)
    
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(3, 2, figsize=(7, 5), sharex=True, sharey=True)
    for i_side, side in enumerate("LR"):
        for i_pos, pos in enumerate("FMH"):
            leg = f"{side}{pos}"
            ax = axs[i_pos, i_side]
            psi_func = psi_funcs[leg]
            joint_angles = np.rad2deg(joint_angles_by_leg[leg])
            for i_dof, dof_name in enumerate(dofs_per_leg):
                legend = dof_name if i_pos == 0 and i_side == 0 else None
                ax.plot(theta_ts, joint_angles[i_dof, :], linewidth=1, label=legend)
            if i_pos == 2:
                ax.set_xlabel("Phase")
                ax.set_xticks(np.pi * np.arange(7))
                ax.set_xticklabels(["0" if x == 0 else rf"{x}$\pi$" for x in np.arange(7)])
            if i_side == 0:
                ax.set_ylabel(r"DoF angle ($\degree$)")
            ax.set_title(f"{leg} leg")
            ax.set_ylim(-180, 180)
            ax.set_yticks([-180, -90, 0, 90, 180])
    fig.legend(loc=7)
    fig.tight_layout()
    fig.subplots_adjust(right=0.8)
    fig.savefig(output_dir / "three_steps_phase_only.png")



.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/cpg_controller/three_steps_phase_only.png?raw=true


We can also modulate the amplitude of the steps using the magnitude
:math:`r` of the CPGs. To do this, we take the difference of the joint
angles from the neutral positions and scale it by :math:`r`. The final
joint positions are therefore :math:`\Psi_0 + r(\Psi - \Psi_0)`. We will
use the beginnings of the preprogrammed steps (right before the start of
the swing) as the neutral positions.

Let’s repeat the previous exercise, but gradually ramp up the amplitude
from 0 to 1:

.. code:: ipython3

    theta_ts = np.linspace(0, 3 * 2 * np.pi, 10000)
    r_ts = np.linspace(0, 1, 10000)
    
    ##### THIS SECTION HAS CHANGED #####
    joint_angles_by_leg = {}
    for leg, psi_func in psi_funcs.items():
        neutral_pos = psi_func(0)[:, np.newaxis]
        joint_angles_by_leg[leg] = neutral_pos + r_ts * (psi_func(theta_ts) - neutral_pos)
    ####################################
    
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(3, 2, figsize=(7, 5), sharex=True, sharey=True)
    for i_side, side in enumerate("LR"):
        for i_pos, pos in enumerate("FMH"):
            leg = f"{side}{pos}"
            ax = axs[i_pos, i_side]
            psi_func = psi_funcs[leg]
            joint_angles = np.rad2deg(joint_angles_by_leg[leg])
            for i_dof, dof_name in enumerate(dofs_per_leg):
                legend = dof_name if i_pos == 0 and i_side == 0 else None
                ax.plot(theta_ts, joint_angles[i_dof, :], linewidth=1, label=legend)
            if i_pos == 2:
                ax.set_xlabel("Phase")
                ax.set_xticks(np.pi * np.arange(7))
                ax.set_xticklabels(["0" if x == 0 else rf"{x}$\pi$" for x in np.arange(7)])
            if i_side == 0:
                ax.set_ylabel(r"DoF angle ($\degree$)")
            ax.set_title(f"{leg} leg")
            ax.set_ylim(-180, 180)
            ax.set_yticks([-180, -90, 0, 90, 180])
    fig.legend(loc=7)
    fig.tight_layout()
    fig.subplots_adjust(right=0.8)
    fig.savefig(output_dir / "three_steps_amp_modulated.png")



.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/cpg_controller/three_steps_amp_modulated.png?raw=true


We have now built the individual elements of the controller:

-  On the level of inter-leg coordination, the CPG network controls the
   phase :math:`\theta` of each leg of the magnitude :math:`r` of its
   steps.
-  On the level of per-leg kinematics, we find the corresponding joint
   states at the phase :math:`\theta` based on experimentally recorded
   data, scaled by the amplitude :math:`r`.

In the next section, we will piece these components together and plug
them into the physics simulation.

Plugging the controller into the simulation
-------------------------------------------

We will now put everything together and control the simulated fly using
the controller that we have designed. The following content assumes that
you have read the tutorial `“Interacting with
NeuroMechFly” <https://neuromechfly.org/tutorials/gym_basics_and_kinematic_replay.html>`__.

We start by initializing the simulation:

.. code:: ipython3

    from flygym import Fly, ZStabilizedCamera, SingleFlySimulation
    from flygym.preprogrammed import all_leg_dofs

    run_time = 1
    fly = Fly(init_pose="stretch", actuated_joints=all_leg_dofs, control="position")
    cam = ZStabilizedCamera(
        attachment_point=fly.model.worldbody, camera_name="camera_left",
        targeted_fly_names=[fly.name], play_speed=0.1
    )
    sim = SingleFlySimulation(fly=fly, cameras=[cam], timestep=1e-4)

We will also initialize a CPG network:

.. code:: ipython3

    intrinsic_freqs = np.ones(6) * 12
    intrinsic_amps = np.ones(6) * 1
    phase_biases = np.pi * np.array(
        [
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
        ]
    )
    coupling_weights = (phase_biases > 0) * 10
    convergence_coefs = np.ones(6) * 1000
    
    cpg_network = CPGNetwork(
        timestep=1e-4,
        intrinsic_freqs=intrinsic_freqs,
        intrinsic_amps=intrinsic_amps,
        coupling_weights=coupling_weights,
        phase_biases=phase_biases,
        convergence_coefs=convergence_coefs,
        seed=1,
    )

.. code:: ipython3

    swing_start = np.empty(6)
    swing_end = np.empty(6)
    for i, leg in enumerate(legs):
        swing_start[i] = single_steps_data["swing_stance_time"]["swing"][leg]
        swing_end[i] = single_steps_data["swing_stance_time"]["stance"][leg]
    swing_start /= preprogrammed_steps_length * preprogrammed_steps_timestep
    swing_start *= 2 * np.pi
    swing_end /= preprogrammed_steps_length * preprogrammed_steps_timestep
    swing_end *= 2 * np.pi
    
    # have the rest phase in between the swing and stance phase (as the data starts with swing initiation)
    psi_rest_phases = np.ones_like(swing_start)
    for i, leg in enumerate(legs):
        psi_rest_phases[i] = (swing_end[i] + 2 * np.pi) / 2

Let’s run the simulation:

.. code:: ipython3

    from tqdm import trange
    
    obs, info = sim.reset()
    for _ in trange(int(run_time / sim.timestep)):
        cpg_network.step()
        joints_angles = {}
        for i, leg in enumerate(legs):
            psi = psi_funcs[leg](cpg_network.curr_phases[i])
            psi_base = psi_funcs[leg](psi_rest_phases[i])
            adjusted_psi = psi_base + (psi - psi_base) * cpg_network.curr_magnitudes[i]
            for dof, angle in zip(dofs_per_leg, adjusted_psi):
                joints_angles[f"joint_{leg}{dof}"] = angle
        action = {"joints": np.array([joints_angles[dof] for dof in fly.actuated_joints])}
        obs, reward, terminated, truncated, info = sim.step(action)
        sim.render()
    
    cam.save_video(output_dir / "cpg_controller.mp4", 0)


.. parsed-literal::

    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:18<00:00, 549.74it/s]


.. raw:: html

   <video src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/main/flygym/cpg_controller/cpg_controller.mp4" controls="controls" style="max-width: 400px;"></video>


Leg adhesion
------------

Insects, including flies, have evolved highly specialized adhesive
structures to facilitate locomotion over complex 3D terrain. Substantial
normal forces (10–100 times body weight) and frictional forces emerge
from interactions between the adhesive pads and underlying substrates.
These allow insects to navigate 3D terrain with ease. Because we cannot
fully represent the physics underlying real, biological adhesion, we
added a more abstract leg adhesion to our model by injecting an
additional normal force to the pretarsus of each leg when it is in
contact with a substrate. This adhesive force increases the normal force
toward the object and the frictional force.

Despite the huge forces generated by adhesive pads, insects can still
lift their legs, seemingly with out effort. The mechanisms for lifting
off are not well understood in *Drosophila*. Therefore, we abstracted
the mechanisms used by other insects for lifting by turning adhesion
forces on during stance and off during swing phases. In the
preprogrammed stepping data, we have also indicated the start (in
seconds) of the swing and stance periods:

.. code:: ipython3

    single_steps_data["swing_stance_time"]




.. parsed-literal::

    {'swing': {'RF': 0.0, 'RM': 0.0, 'RH': 0.0, 'LF': 0.0, 'LM': 0.0, 'LH': 0.0},
     'stance': {'RF': 0.051000000000000004,
      'RM': 0.048,
      'RH': 0.042,
      'LF': 0.051000000000000004,
      'LM': 0.048,
      'LH': 0.042}}



Let’s write a function that, given the phases of the legs, return a
boolean mask indicating whether adhesion should be on (during stance) or
off (during swing):

.. code:: ipython3

    def get_adhesion_onoff(theta):
        theta = theta % (2 * np.pi)
        return ~((theta > swing_start) & (theta < swing_end)).squeeze()

To illustrate this binary signal (low = off, during swing; high = on,
during stance):

.. code:: ipython3

    onoff_signal = np.zeros((6, phase_grid.size), dtype=bool)
    for i in range(phase_grid.size):
        onoff_signal[:, i] = get_adhesion_onoff(phase_grid[i])
    
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(4, 2), tight_layout=True)
    for i in range(6):
        ax.plot(phase_grid, onoff_signal[i, :] - i * 1.5)
    ax.set_yticks(-np.arange(6) * 1.5 + 0.5)
    ax.set_yticklabels(legs)
    ax.set_xticks(np.arange(5) * np.pi / 2)
    ax.set_xticklabels(["0", r"$\pi/2$", r"$\pi$", r"3$\pi$/2", r"$2\pi$"])
    ax.set_xlabel("Phase")
    ax.set_ylabel("Adhesion on/off")
    fig.savefig(output_dir / "adhesion_signal.png")



.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/cpg_controller/adhesion_signal.png?raw=true


We can rerun the NeuroMechFly simulation with adhesion enabled. The
parts of the code that have been changed are indicated with comments.

.. code:: ipython3

    run_time = 1
    
    fly = Fly(
        init_pose="stretch",
        actuated_joints=all_leg_dofs,
        control="position",
        enable_adhesion=True,
        draw_adhesion=True,
    )
    cam = ZStabilizedCamera(attachment_point=fly.model.worldbody,
        camera_name="camera_left",
        targeted_fly_names=[0], play_speed=0.1)
    sim = SingleFlySimulation(fly=fly, cameras=[cam], timestep=1e-4)
    
    cpg_network.reset()
    
    ang = []
    
    obs, info = sim.reset()
    for _ in trange(int(run_time / sim.timestep)):
        cpg_network.step()
        joints_angles = {}
        for i, leg in enumerate(legs):
            psi = psi_funcs[leg](cpg_network.curr_phases[i])
            psi_base = psi_funcs[leg](psi_rest_phases[i])
            adjusted_psi = psi_base + (psi - psi_base) * cpg_network.curr_magnitudes[i]
            for dof, angle in zip(dofs_per_leg, adjusted_psi):
                joints_angles[f"joint_{leg}{dof}"] = angle
        adhesion_onoff = get_adhesion_onoff(cpg_network.curr_phases)
        ang.append([joints_angles[dof] for dof in fly.actuated_joints])
        action = {
            "joints": np.array([joints_angles[dof] for dof in fly.actuated_joints]),
            ##### THIS LINE IS NEW #####
            "adhesion": adhesion_onoff.astype(int),
            ############################
        }
        obs, reward, terminated, truncated, info = sim.step(action)
        sim.render()
    
    cam.save_video(output_dir / "cpg_controller_with_adhesion.mp4", 0)


.. parsed-literal::

    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:26<00:00, 384.60it/s]


.. raw:: html

   <video src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/main/flygym/cpg_controller/cpg_controller_with_adhesion.mp4" controls="controls" style="max-width: 400px;"></video>


In summary, in this tutorial we have (1) implemented a Python class for
CPG networks, (2) used it to modulate the stepping of legs using
experimentally recorded data, (3) plugged this controller into the
NeuroMechFly embodiment, and (4) added leg adhesion to the simulation.
Note that the controller we built here is feedforward — that is,
mechanosensory feedback is not used by the controller (except the
position feedback in the PD controller for individual joints). In the
next tutorial, we will build a rule-based controller where leg
coordination is accomplished using sensory feedback in a more
distributed manner.
