Overcome complex terrain with a hybrid controller
=================================================

.. note::

    **Authors:** Victor Alfred Stimpfling, Sibo Wang-Chen

    The code presented in this notebook has been simplified and
    restructured for display in a notebook format. A more complete and
    better structured implementation can be found in the `examples folder of
    the FlyGym repository on
    GitHub <https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/flygym/tree/main/flygym/examples/>`__.

    This tutorial is available in ``.ipynb`` format in the
    `notebooks folder of the FlyGym repository <https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/flygym/tree/main/notebooks>`_.

**Summary**: In this tutorial, we will illustrate how CPG- and
rule-based controllers fail to produce robust locomotion over complex
terrain. We will then build a combined CPG and sensory feedback-based
hybrid controller that overcomes these deficits and generates more
robust walking.

In the `Controlling locomotion with
CPGs <https://neuromechfly.org/tutorials/cpg_controller.html>`__ and
`Rule-based
controller <https://neuromechfly.org/tutorials/rule_based_controller.html>`__
tutorials, we have demonstrated how different control strategies can
lead to effective walking over simple, flat terrain. However, in the
real world animals locomote over rugged surfaces. To achieve this,
animals likely use a combination of CPGs and sensory feedback to produce
agile, adaptive body kinematics. To explore how sensory feedback can
facilitate locomotion over rugged surfaces, we have developed three
terrain types that complement our baseline smooth terrain: one with gaps
perpendicular to the initial heading of the fly, one with blocks of
variable height, and one that is a mixture of these two. Using these new
terrain types, we will now demonstrate how one can examine the efficacy
of different bioinspired locomotor control strategies.

Defining the arena
------------------

The environment that the fly is situated in is defined by the Arena
class. So far, we have been using the default terrain: ``FlatTerrain``.
Some other arenas are also included in FlyGym package, including
``GappedTerrain``, ``BlocksTerrain``, and ``MixedTerrain``. In future
tutorials, we will introduce more arenas with sensory (visual,
olfactory) features. The user can define custom arenas by inheriting
from the ``flygym.mujoco.arena.BaseArena`` abstract class.

Let’s start by defining a couple of terrains:

.. code:: ipython3

    from flygym.arena import FlatTerrain, GappedTerrain, BlocksTerrain, MixedTerrain
    
    
    def get_arena(arena_type):
        if arena_type == "flat":
            return FlatTerrain()
        elif arena_type == "gapped":
            return GappedTerrain()
        elif arena_type == "blocks":
            return BlocksTerrain()
        elif arena_type == "mixed":
            return MixedTerrain()
        else:
            raise ValueError(f"Unknown arena type: {arena_type}")

Let’s put a fly into each of these terrains, run 0.01 seconds of the
simulation so the fly can stabilize on the floor, and visualize how the
fly looks while walking over these different terrain types:

.. code:: ipython3

    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    from tqdm import tqdm, trange
    from flygym import Fly, ZStabCamera, SingleFlySimulation
    from flygym.examples.locomotion import PreprogrammedSteps
    from pathlib import Path

    output_dir = Path("./outputs/hybrid_controller")
    output_dir.mkdir(exist_ok=True, parents=True)
    
    preprogrammed_steps = PreprogrammedSteps()  # we will use the neutral pose from this
    
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(2, 2, figsize=(6, 6), tight_layout=True)
    terrain_types = ["flat", "gapped", "blocks", "mixed"]
    for i, terrain_type in tqdm(enumerate(terrain_types)):
        ax = axs.flat[i]
        terrain = get_arena(terrain_type)
        # Initialize NeuroMechFly simulation
        fly = Fly(
            enable_adhesion=True,
            draw_adhesion=True,
            init_pose="stretch",
            control="position",
        )
        cam = ZStabCamera(
            attachment_point=fly.model.worldbody,
            camera_name="camera_left", attachment_name=fly.name,
            targeted_flies_id=[fly.name], play_speed=0.1
        )
        sim = SingleFlySimulation(
            fly=fly,
            cameras=[cam],
            timestep=1e-4,
            arena=terrain,
        )
        sim.reset()
        for _ in range(100):
            action = {
                "joints": preprogrammed_steps.default_pose,
                "adhesion": np.ones(6, dtype=np.int32),
            }
            sim.step(action)
            sim.render()
        ax.imshow(sim.cameras[0]._frames[-1])
        ax.axis("off")
        ax.set_title(f"{terrain_type.title()} terrain")
    
    fig.savefig(output_dir / "complex_terrain_overview.png")


.. parsed-literal::

    4it [00:14,  3.75s/it]



.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/hybrid_controller/complex_terrain_overview.png?raw=true


Basic CPG- and rule-based controllers
-------------------------------------

Do the CPG- and rule-based controllers work well over complex terrain?
Let’s run the simulation for 0.5 seconds using each of these controllers
on each of the different terrain types:

.. code:: ipython3

    from flygym.examples.locomotion.cpg_controller import CPGNetwork, run_cpg_simulation
    from flygym.examples.locomotion.rule_based_controller import (
        RuleBasedController,
        construct_rules_graph,
        run_rule_based_simulation,
    )
    
    run_time = 1.0
    timestep = 1e-4
    
    for controller_name in ["CPG-based", "Rule-based"]:
        for terrain_name in terrain_types:
            print(f"* Running {controller_name} controller on {terrain_name} terrain")
    
            terrain = get_arena(terrain_name)
    
            # Initialize the simulation
            fly = Fly(
                enable_adhesion=True,
                draw_adhesion=True,
                init_pose="stretch",
                control="position",
            )
            cam = ZStabCamera(
                attachment_point=fly.model.worldbody,
                camera_name="camera_left", attachment_name=fly.name,
                targeted_flies_id=[fly.name], play_speed=0.1
            )
            sim = SingleFlySimulation(
                fly=fly,
                cameras=[cam],
                timestep=1e-4,
                arena=terrain,
            )
            sim.reset()
    
            if controller_name == "CPG-based":
                intrinsic_freqs = np.ones(6) * 12
                intrinsic_amps = np.ones(6) * 1
                phase_biases = np.pi * np.array(
                    [
                        [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
                        [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
                        [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
                        [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
                        [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
                        [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
                    ]
                )
                coupling_weights = (phase_biases > 0) * 10
                convergence_coefs = np.ones(6) * 20
                cpg_network = CPGNetwork(
                    timestep=timestep,
                    intrinsic_freqs=intrinsic_freqs,
                    intrinsic_amps=intrinsic_amps,
                    coupling_weights=coupling_weights,
                    phase_biases=phase_biases,
                    convergence_coefs=convergence_coefs,
                )
                run_cpg_simulation(sim, cpg_network, preprogrammed_steps, run_time)
            elif controller_name == "Rule-based":
                weights = {
                    "rule1": -10,
                    "rule2_ipsi": 2.5,
                    "rule2_contra": 1,
                    "rule3_ipsi": 3.0,
                    "rule3_contra": 2.0,
                }
                rules_graph = construct_rules_graph()
                controller = RuleBasedController(
                    timestep=timestep,
                    rules_graph=rules_graph,
                    weights=weights,
                    preprogrammed_steps=preprogrammed_steps,
                )
                run_rule_based_simulation(sim, controller, run_time)
            else:
                raise ValueError(f"Unknown controller: {controller}")
    
            x_pos = sim.get_observation()["fly"][0, 0]
            print(f"Final x position: {x_pos:.4f} mm")
    
            cam.save_video(output_dir / f"{controller_name}_{terrain_name}.mp4")


.. parsed-literal::

    * Running CPG-based controller on flat terrain
    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:26<00:00, 377.15it/s]
    Final x position: 13.8034 mm
    * Running CPG-based controller on gapped terrain
    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [01:23<00:00, 119.61it/s]
    Final x position: 4.3090 mm
    * Running CPG-based controller on blocks terrain
    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:41<00:00, 241.69it/s]
    Final x position: 9.0447 mm
    * Running CPG-based controller on mixed terrain
    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:53<00:00, 185.22it/s]
    Final x position: 6.3057 mm
    * Running Rule-based controller on flat terrain
    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:29<00:00, 335.04it/s]
    Final x position: 6.2626 mm
    * Running Rule-based controller on gapped terrain
    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [01:14<00:00, 133.59it/s]
    Final x position: 4.4435 mm
    * Running Rule-based controller on blocks terrain
    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:41<00:00, 242.36it/s]
    Final x position: 4.6136 mm
    * Running Rule-based controller on mixed terrain
    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:51<00:00, 192.58it/s]
    Final x position: 5.2407 mm


Though we have only tested one initial condition (spawn position,
controller) per case, we can already begin to observe that the CPG- and
rule-based controllers may not perform robustly over complex terrain. In
fact, if we run 20 initial conditions for 1 second each, we get a result
like the one reported in the NeuroMechFly v2 paper (Wang-Chen et al.,
2023):

.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/hybrid_controller/cpg_rule_based_comparison.png?raw=true


We can look more closely at some examples of failed locomotion:

*CPG-based controller over gapped terrain:*

.. raw:: html

   <video src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/main/flygym/hybrid_controller/CPG-based_mixed.mp4" controls="controls" style="max-width: 400px;"></video>


*Rule-based controller over gapped terrain:*

.. raw:: html

   <video src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/main/flygym/hybrid_controller/Rule-based_mixed.mp4" controls="controls" style="max-width: 400px;"></video>


In the next section, we will show how, by combining CPGs with sensory
feedback, we can build a more robust “hybrid” controller.

Building a hybrid controller
----------------------------

Now, we will build a hybrid controller that integrates both CPG-like
oscillators and sensory feedback-based rules that reposition the legs
when they get stuck. As described in the NeuroMechFly v2 paper, we will
detect the following conditions:

1. **Retraction:** In principle, with the tripod gait, there should
   always be three legs on the ground. Therefore, if any leg is extended
   farther than the third most extended leg in the z-direction (height),
   this leg may be stuck in a hole. This rule will lift the leg to
   recover it from a stuck position.
2. **Stumbling:** In principle, only the tip of the tarsus of each leg
   should contact with the ground. Therefore, we will consider the fly
   to be stumbling if the tibia or upper tarsal segments (1 and 2)
   collide with terrain resulting in a supra-threshold force against the
   direction of the fly’s heading. To correct for stumbling we will lift
   the stumbling leg.

To implement these rules, we will create a variable for each rule that
keeps track of the extent to which a given leg should be lifted:

.. code:: ipython3

    retraction_correction = np.zeros(6)
    stumbling_correction = np.zeros(6)
    
    retraction_persistence_counter = np.zeros(6)

We will also define a vector representing how each DoF should be
adjusted to implement leg lifting. We will call this
:math:`\vec{v}_\text{leg}`.

.. code:: ipython3

    correction_vectors = {
        # "leg pos": (Coxa, Coxa_roll, Coxa_yaw, Femur, Femur_roll, Tibia, Tarsus1)
        # unit: radian
        "F": np.array([-0.03, 0, 0, -0.03, 0, 0.03, 0.03]),
        "M": np.array([-0.015, 0.001, 0.025, -0.02, 0, -0.02, 0.0]),
        "H": np.array([0, 0, 0, -0.02, 0, 0.01, -0.02]),
    }

That is, when the leg should be lifted, we will increment the joint
angles on this leg by :math:`\vec{v}_\text{leg}` scaled by a factor
defining the extent of correction. When the condition is no longer met,
we will reduce the correction term until it reaches zero (i.e., with no
adjustment) so that the target angles applied to the simulator are those
suggested by the corresponding CPGs.

Next, we need to define the factor dictating the extent of correction.
Recall that we will progressively lift the leg when an adjustment is
necessary. Therefore, let’s also define the rate of adjustment
:math:`k_\text{inc}` when the condition is met and the rate of recovery
:math:`k_\text{dec}` when the condition is no longer met:

.. code:: ipython3

    correction_rates = {
        # "rule": (increment rate, decrement rate). unit: 1/sec
        "retraction": (800, 700),
        "stumbling": (2200, 1800),
    }

Concretely, we will initialize the amount of correction :math:`c` to 0.
This variable is unitless. For every :math:`t` amount of time that the
condition is met, we increment :math:`c` by :math:`k_\text{inc}t` where
:math:`k_\text{inc}` is the appropriate correction rate. Similarly, for
every :math:`t` amount of time that the condition is no longer met, we
will decrement :math:`c` by :math:`k_\text{dec}t` until it reaches 0. We
will therefore adjust the leg joint angles by adding
:math:`c\vec{v}_\text{leg}` to it.

We should also define a threshold for the stumbling force. Note that a
negative number indicates a force against the direction in which the fly
is facing:

.. code:: ipython3

    stumbling_force_threshold = -1

Next, we will define the underlying CPG network as we did in the
`tutorial on CPG-based
control <https://neuromechfly.org/tutorials/cpg_controller.html>`__:

.. code:: ipython3

    run_time = 1
    timestep = 1e-4
    
    # define parameters for persistence and cap the increment
    max_increment = 80 / 1e-4
    retraction_persistence = 20 / 1e-4
    persistence_init_thr = 20 / 1e-4
    
    right_leg_inversion = [1, -1, -1, 1, -1, 1, 1]
    
    # Initialize the CPG network
    intrinsic_freqs = np.ones(6) * 12
    intrinsic_amps = np.ones(6) * 1
    phase_biases = np.pi * np.array(
        [
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
            [0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1],
            [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
        ]
    )
    coupling_weights = (phase_biases > 0) * 10
    convergence_coefs = np.ones(6) * 20
    cpg_network = CPGNetwork(
        timestep=1e-4,
        intrinsic_freqs=intrinsic_freqs,
        intrinsic_amps=intrinsic_amps,
        coupling_weights=coupling_weights,
        phase_biases=phase_biases,
        convergence_coefs=convergence_coefs,
    )

Similarly, let’s define the preprogrammed steps:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Initialize preprogrammed steps
    preprogrammed_steps = PreprogrammedSteps()

In our hybrid controller the action performed by a leg stuck in a hole
or colliding with an edge depends on the stepping phase. Upon on
activating one of the rules, when the leg is in stance and adhesion is
on, the leg can be slightly more extended to allow the other legs to
overcome an obstacle. When the leg is in swing and one of the legs is
active, the leg can be retracted higher to help overcome the obstacle.
Here we define the phasic gain that will help to implement this
behavior.

.. code:: ipython3

    from scipy.interpolate import interp1d
    
    step_phase_gain = {}
    
    for leg in preprogrammed_steps.legs:
        swing_start, swing_end = preprogrammed_steps.swing_period[leg]
    
        step_points = [
            swing_start,
            np.mean([swing_start, swing_end]),
            swing_end + np.pi / 4,
            np.mean([swing_end, 2 * np.pi]),
            2 * np.pi,
        ]
        preprogrammed_steps.swing_period[leg] = (swing_start, swing_end + np.pi / 4)
        increment_vals = [0, 0.8, 0, -0.1, 0]
    
        step_phase_gain[leg] = interp1d(
            step_points, increment_vals, kind="linear", fill_value="extrapolate"
        )
    
    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(7, 3), tight_layout=True)
    step_phase = np.linspace(0, 4 * np.pi, 100)
    
    plt.plot(step_phase, step_phase_gain[leg](step_phase % (2 * np.pi)), label=leg)
    for i in range(2):
        plt.axvspan(
            swing_start + i * 2 * np.pi,
            swing_end + i * 2 * np.pi,
            color="red",
            alpha=0.2,
            label="swing",
        )
    plt.legend()
    plt.xlabel("Phase (rad)")
    plt.ylabel("Gain")
    # label in pi
    plt.xticks(
        [0, np.pi, 2 * np.pi, 3 * np.pi, 4 * np.pi],
        ["0", r"$\pi$", r"$2\pi$", r"$3\pi$", r"$4\pi$"],
    )
    plt.title("Step phase dependent gain")
    plt.savefig(output_dir / "step_phase_dependent_gain.png")



.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/hybrid_controller/step_phase_dependent_gain.png?raw=true


… and the NeuroMechFly simulation over mixed terrain. We will enable
contact detection for all tibial and tarsal segments to achieve
stumbling detection:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Initialize NeuroMechFly simulation
    # Initialize the simulation
    
    contact_sensor_placements = [
        f"{leg}{segment}"
        for leg in preprogrammed_steps.legs
        for segment in ["Tibia", "Tarsus1", "Tarsus2", "Tarsus3", "Tarsus4", "Tarsus5"]
    ]
    
    np.random.seed(0)
    fly = Fly(
        enable_adhesion=True,
        draw_adhesion=True,
        init_pose="stretch",
        control="position",
        contact_sensor_placements=contact_sensor_placements,
    )
    cam = ZStabCamera(
        attachment_point=fly.model.worldbody,
        camera_name="camera_left", attachment_name=fly.name,
        targeted_flies_id=[fly.name], play_speed=0.1
    )
    arena = MixedTerrain()
    sim = SingleFlySimulation(
        fly=fly,
        cameras=[cam],
        timestep=1e-4,
        arena=arena,
    )
    _ = sim.reset()

Let’s build a dictionary containing the indices of the contact sensors
on each leg. These will be used to detect stumbling:

.. code:: ipython3

    detected_segments = ["Tibia", "Tarsus1", "Tarsus2"]
    stumbling_sensors = {leg: [] for leg in preprogrammed_steps.legs}
    for i, sensor_name in enumerate(fly.contact_sensor_placements):
        leg = sensor_name.split("/")[1][:2]  # sensor_name: eg. "Animat/LFTarsus1"
        segment = sensor_name.split("/")[1][2:]
        if segment in detected_segments:
            stumbling_sensors[leg].append(i)
    stumbling_sensors = {k: np.array(v) for k, v in stumbling_sensors.items()}

As a sanity check, let’s make sure that the number of stumble sensors
per leg is as expected:

.. code:: ipython3

    if any(v.size != len(detected_segments) for v in stumbling_sensors.values()):
        raise RuntimeError(
            "Contact detection must be enabled for all tibia, tarsus1, and tarsus2 "
            "segments for stumbling detection."
        )

We are now ready to write the main simulation loop. We will implement
and execute the entire loop before explaining its constituent
components:

.. code:: ipython3

    target_num_steps = int(run_time / sim.timestep)
    obs_list = []
    
    physics_error = False
    
    obs, _ = sim.reset()
    
    for k in trange(target_num_steps):
        # retraction rule: does a leg need to be retracted from a hole?
        end_effector_z_pos = obs["fly"][0][2] - obs["end_effectors"][:, 2]
        end_effector_z_pos_sorted_idx = np.argsort(end_effector_z_pos)
        end_effector_z_pos_sorted = end_effector_z_pos[end_effector_z_pos_sorted_idx]
        if end_effector_z_pos_sorted[-1] > end_effector_z_pos_sorted[-3] + 0.05:
            leg_to_correct_retraction = end_effector_z_pos_sorted_idx[-1]
            if (
                retraction_correction[leg_to_correct_retraction]
                > persistence_init_thr * sim.timestep
            ):
                retraction_persistence_counter[leg_to_correct_retraction] = 1
        else:
            leg_to_correct_retraction = None
    
        # update persistence counter
        retraction_persistence_counter[retraction_persistence_counter > 0] += 1
        retraction_persistence_counter[
            retraction_persistence_counter > retraction_persistence * sim.timestep
        ] = 0
    
        cpg_network.step()
        joints_angles = []
        adhesion_onoff = []
    
        all_net_corrections = []
    
        for i, leg in enumerate(preprogrammed_steps.legs):
            # update amount of retraction correction
            if (
                i == leg_to_correct_retraction or retraction_persistence_counter[i] > 0
            ):  # lift leg
                increment = correction_rates["retraction"][0] * sim.timestep
                retraction_correction[i] += increment
                sim.fly.change_segment_color(sim.physics, f"{leg}Tibia", (1, 0, 0, 1))
            else:  # condition no longer met, lower leg
                decrement = correction_rates["retraction"][1] * sim.timestep
                retraction_correction[i] = max(0, retraction_correction[i] - decrement)
                sim.fly.change_segment_color(sim.physics, f"{leg}Tibia", (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1))
    
            # update amount of stumbling correction
            contact_forces = obs["contact_forces"][stumbling_sensors[leg], :]
            fly_orientation = obs["fly_orientation"]
            # force projection should be negative if against fly orientation
            force_proj = np.dot(contact_forces, fly_orientation)
            if (force_proj < stumbling_force_threshold).any():
                increment = correction_rates["stumbling"][0] * sim.timestep
                stumbling_correction[i] += increment
                if retraction_correction[i] <= 0:
                    sim.fly.change_segment_color(sim.physics, f"{leg}Femur", (1, 0, 0, 1))
            else:
                decrement = correction_rates["stumbling"][1] * sim.timestep
                stumbling_correction[i] = max(0, stumbling_correction[i] - decrement)
                sim.fly.change_segment_color(sim.physics, f"{leg}Femur", (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1))
    
            # retraction correction is prioritized
            if retraction_correction[i] > 0:
                net_correction = retraction_correction[i]
                stumbling_correction[i] = 0
            else:
                net_correction = stumbling_correction[i]
    
            # get target angles from CPGs and apply correction
            my_joints_angles = preprogrammed_steps.get_joint_angles(
                leg, cpg_network.curr_phases[i], cpg_network.curr_magnitudes[i]
            )
            net_correction = np.clip(net_correction, 0, max_increment * sim.timestep)
            if leg[0] == "R":
                net_correction *= right_leg_inversion[i]
    
            # apply phase-dependent gain
            net_correction *= step_phase_gain[leg](cpg_network.curr_phases[i] % (2 * np.pi))
    
            my_joints_angles += net_correction * correction_vectors[leg[1]]
            joints_angles.append(my_joints_angles)
    
            all_net_corrections.append(net_correction)
    
            # get adhesion on/off signal
            my_adhesion_onoff = preprogrammed_steps.get_adhesion_onoff(
                leg, cpg_network.curr_phases[i]
            )
    
            adhesion_onoff.append(my_adhesion_onoff)
    
        action = {
            "joints": np.array(np.concatenate(joints_angles)),
            "adhesion": np.array(adhesion_onoff).astype(int),
        }
        obs, reward, terminated, truncated, info = sim.step(action)
        obs["net_correction"] = all_net_corrections
        obs_list.append(obs)
        sim.render()


.. parsed-literal::

    100%|██████████| 10000/10000 [00:53<00:00, 187.59it/s]


.. code:: ipython3

    print(f"Simulation terminated: {obs_list[-1]['fly'][0] - obs_list[0]['fly'][0]}")


.. parsed-literal::

    Simulation terminated: [10.464745    2.3659656  -0.44085807]


At each simulation time step, we first check whether the retraction rule
is met. This depends on whether any leg is extended further than the
third most extended leg in the z-direction by a margin of 0.05 mm. This
margin is important because contact calculations in the physics
simulator are imperfect sometimes causing the leg to penetrate the floor
by a small amount. If two legs meet this condition, only the most
extended leg is corrected:

.. code:: python

       # retraction rule: does a leg need to be retracted from a hole?
       end_effector_z_pos = obs["fly"][0][2] - obs["end_effectors"][:, 2]
       end_effector_z_pos_sorted_idx = np.argsort(end_effector_z_pos)
       end_effector_z_pos_sorted = end_effector_z_pos[end_effector_z_pos_sorted_idx]
      if end_effector_z_pos_sorted[-1] > end_effector_z_pos_sorted[-3] + 0.05:
           leg_to_correct_retraction = end_effector_z_pos_sorted_idx[-1]
           if retraction_correction[leg_to_correct_retraction] > persistence_init_thr*sim.timestep:
               retraction_persistence_counter[leg_to_correct_retraction] = 1
       else:
           leg_to_correct_retraction = None

       # update persistence counter
       retraction_persistence_counter[retraction_persistence_counter > 0] += 1
       retraction_persistence_counter[
           retraction_persistence_counter > retraction_persistence*sim.timestep
       ] = 0

We also implemented persistence so that the rule is still active for a
few steps after the condition is no longer met. The leg’s protraction
should be maintained for some time to avoid it falling back into the
hole.

Then, have an inner loop that iterates over all legs. The joint angles
and adhesion on/off signals are calculated here. We first update the
amount of correction :math:``c`` for the retraction rule:

.. code:: python

           # update amount of retraction correction
           if (
               i == leg_to_correct_retraction or retraction_persistence_counter[i] > 0
           ):  # lift leg
               increment = correction_rates["retraction"][0] * nmf.timestep
               retraction_correction[i] += increment
               nmf.change_segment_color(f"{leg}Tibia", (1, 0, 0, 1))
           else:  # condition no longer met, lower leg
               decrement = correction_rates["retraction"][1] * nmf.timestep
               retraction_correction[i] = max(0, retraction_correction[i] - decrement)
               nmf.change_segment_color(f"{leg}Tibia", (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1))

Similarly, we update the correction amount :math:`c` for the stumbling
rule:

.. code:: python

           # update amount of stumbling correction
           contact_forces = obs["contact_forces"][stumbling_sensors[leg], :]
           fly_orientation = obs["fly_orientation"]
           # force projection should be negative if against fly orientation
           force_proj = np.dot(contact_forces, fly_orientation)
           if (force_proj < stumbling_force_threshold).any():
               increment = correction_rates["stumbling"][0] * nmf.timestep
               stumbling_correction[i] += increment
               if retraction_correction[i] <= 0:
                   nmf.change_segment_color(f"{leg}Femur", (1, 0, 0, 1))
           else:
               decrement = correction_rates["stumbling"][1] * nmf.timestep
               stumbling_correction[i] = max(0, stumbling_correction[i] - decrement)
               nmf.change_segment_color(f"{leg}Femur", (0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1))

In case both rules are active for the same leg, we will only apply the
retraction correction:

.. code:: python

           # retraction correction is prioritized
           if retraction_correction[i] > 0:
               net_correction = retraction_correction[i]
               
           else:
               net_correction = stumbling_correction[i]

Let’s first obtain the initial joint angles based purely on the CPG
phase and preprogrammed step. Then, we will apply the lifting
correction:

.. code:: python

           # get target angles from CPGs and apply correction
           my_joints_angles = preprogrammed_steps.get_joint_angles(
               leg, cpg_network.curr_phases[i], cpg_network.curr_magnitudes[i]
           )
           my_joints_angles += net_correction * correction_vectors[leg[1]]
           joints_angles.append(my_joints_angles)

The net correction for roll and yaw angles needs to be inverted for the
resulting action to be symmetric

.. code:: python

        net_correction = np.clip(net_correction, 0, max_increment*sim.timestep)
           if leg[0] == "R":
               net_correction *= right_leg_inversion[i]

The net correction needs to be reversed to lead to retraction or
protraction if during swing or stance phase

.. code:: python

           # apply phase dependent gain
           net_correction *= step_phase_gain[leg](cpg_network.curr_phases[i] % (2*np.pi))

Finally, we can obtain the adhesion on/off signal based on the leg phase
as well:

.. code:: python

           # get adhesion on/off signal
           my_adhesion_onoff = preprogrammed_steps.get_adhesion_onoff(
               leg, cpg_network.curr_phases[i]
           )
           adhesion_onoff.append(my_adhesion_onoff)

We now have all we need to feed the action into the NeuroMechFly
simulation. Don’t forget to call ``.render()`` to record the video
correctly.

.. code:: python

       action = {
           "joints": np.array(np.concatenate(joints_angles)),
           "adhesion": np.array(adhesion_onoff).astype(int),
       }
       obs, reward, terminated, truncated, info = nmf.step(action)
       nmf.render()

Let’s visualize the results:

.. code:: ipython3

    cam.save_video(output_dir / "hybrid_controller_mixed_terrain.mp4")

.. raw:: html

   <video src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/main/flygym/hybrid_controller/hybrid_controller_mixed_terrain.mp4" controls="controls" style="max-width: 400px;"></video>


Even based on this single example, this hybrid controller looks better
than the CPG- or rule-based controller. Indeed, we obtained the
following results by running 20 simulations for each controller over
each terrain type starting with different initial conditions. These show
that a hybrid controller outperforms the other two controllers (see the
NeuroMechFly v2 paper for details):

.. image:: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/hybrid_controller/cpg_rule_based_hybrid_comparison.png?raw=true


These results demonstrate how rugged terrain can expose failure modes
for controllers that otherwise work well on flat terrain, and how you
can use NeuroMechFly to benchmark different control strategies that go
beyond the classic dichotomy of CPG- versus rule-based control.

In the next tutorial, we will refactor our hybrid controller code into a
Python class that implements the Gym interface. This will allow us to
show how to build control models with different degrees of abstraction
and preprogrammed computations.
