Vision
======

**Summary:** In this tutorial, we will build a simple model to control
the fly to follow a moving sphere. By doing so, we will also demonstrate
how one can create a custom arena.

Animals typically navigate over rugged terrain to reach attractive
objects (eg. potential mates, food sources) and to avoid repulsive
features (eg. pheromones from predators) and obstacles. Animals use a
hierarchical controller to achieve these goals: processing higher-order
sensory signals, using them to select the next action, and translating
these decisions into descending commands that drive lower-level motor
systems. We aimed to simulate this sensorimotor hierarchy by adding
vision and olfaction to NeuroMechFly.

Retina simulation
-----------------

A fly’s compound eye consists of ∼700–750 individual units called
ommatidia arranged in a hexagonal pattern (see the left panel of the
figure below from the `droso4schools
project <https://droso4schools.wordpress.com/l4-enzymes/#5>`__; see also
`this article <https://azretina.sites.arizona.edu/node/789>`__ from the
Arizona Retina Project). To emulate this, we attached a color camera to
each of our model’s compound eyes (top right panel). We then transformed
each camera image into 721 bins, representing ommatidia. Based on
previous studies, we assume a 270° combined azimuth for the fly’s field
of view, with a ∼17° binocular overlap. Visual sensitivity has evolved
to highlight ethologically relevant color spectra at different locations
in the environment. Here, as an initial step toward enabling this
heterogeneity in our model, we implemented yellow- and pale-type
ommatidia—sensitive to the green and blue channels of images rendered by
the physics simulator—randomly assigned at a 7:3 ratio (as reported in
`Rister et al, 2013 <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23293281/>`__).
Users can substitute the green and blue channel values with the desired
light intensities sensed by yellow- and pale-type ommatidia to achieve
more biorealistic chromatic vision.


.. figure :: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/vision.png?raw=true
   :width: 800


In NeuroMechFly, the main interface to interact with the fly is the
`Retina
class <https://neuromechfly.org/api_ref/vision.html#retina-simulation>`__.
It is embedded into the ``NeuroMechFly`` class as its ``.retina``
attribute if ``enable_vision`` is set to True in
``NeuroMechFly.sim_params``. Here, let’s reproduce the top right panel
of the figure above by putting the fly into an arena with three pillars
and simulating the fly’s visual experience.

To start, we do the necessary imports:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import numpy as np
    from tqdm import trange
    from gymnasium.utils.env_checker import check_env
    
    from flygym.mujoco import Parameters
    from flygym.mujoco.arena import FlatTerrain
    from flygym.mujoco.examples.obstacle_arena import ObstacleOdorArena
    from flygym.mujoco.examples.turning_controller import HybridTurningNMF

We have pre-implemented an ``ObstacleOdorArena`` class with visual
obstacles and an odor source. The details of this class is beyond the
scope of this tutorial, but you can refer to it on the `FlyGym github
repository <https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/flygym/blob/main/flygym/mujoco/examples/obstacle_arena.py>`__:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    # We start by creating a simple arena
    flat_terrain_arena = FlatTerrain()
    
    # Then, we add visual and olfactory features on top of it
    arena = ObstacleOdorArena(
        terrain=flat_terrain_arena,
        obstacle_positions=np.array([(7.5, 0), (12.5, 5), (17.5, -5)]),
        marker_size=0.5,
        obstacle_colors=[(0.14, 0.14, 0.2, 1), (0.2, 0.8, 0.2, 1), (0.2, 0.2, 0.8, 1)],
        user_camera_settings=((13, -18, 9), (np.deg2rad(65), 0, 0), 45),
    )

Let’s put the fly in it and simulate 500 timesteps so the fly can stand
on the floor in a stable manner:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    contact_sensor_placements = [
        f"{leg}{segment}"
        for leg in ["LF", "LM", "LH", "RF", "RM", "RH"]
        for segment in ["Tibia", "Tarsus1", "Tarsus2", "Tarsus3", "Tarsus4", "Tarsus5"]
    ]
    sim_params = Parameters(
        render_playspeed=0.2,
        render_camera="user_cam",
        enable_vision=True,
        render_raw_vision=True,
        enable_olfaction=True,
    )
    nmf = HybridTurningNMF(
        sim_params=sim_params,
        arena=arena,
        spawn_pos=(13, -5, 0.2),
        spawn_orientation=(0, 0, np.pi / 2 + np.deg2rad(70)),
        contact_sensor_placements=contact_sensor_placements,
    )
    
    for i in range(500):
        obs, reward, terminated, truncated, info = nmf.step(np.zeros(2))
        nmf.render()
    
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(4, 3), tight_layout=True)
    ax.imshow(nmf._frames[-1])
    ax.axis("off")
    fig.savefig("./outputs/vision_sim_env.png")


.. figure :: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/vision_sim_env.png?raw=true
   :width: 400


We can access the intensities sensed by the fly’s ommatidia from the
observation:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    print(obs["vision"])
    print("Shape:", obs["vision"].shape)
    print("Data type:", obs["vision"].dtype)


.. parsed-literal::

    [[[0.9913793  0.        ]
      [1.         0.        ]
      [1.         0.        ]
      ...
      [0.31609195 0.        ]
      [0.29803923 0.        ]
      [0.29803923 0.        ]]
    
     [[0.9913793  0.        ]
      [1.         0.        ]
      [1.         0.        ]
      ...
      [0.29803923 0.        ]
      [0.3752228  0.        ]
      [0.4        0.        ]]]
    Shape: (2, 721, 2)
    Data type: float32


This gives us a (2, 722, 2) array representing the light intensities
sensed by the ommatidia. The values are normalized to [0, 1]. The first
dimension is for the two eyes (left and right in that order). The second
dimension is for the 721 ommatidia per eye. The third dimension is for
the two color channels (yellow- and pale-type in that order). For each
ommatidia, only one of the two numbers along the last dimension is
nonzero. The yellow- and pale-type ommatidia are split at a 7:3 ratio.
We can verify this below:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    nonzero_idx = np.nonzero(obs["vision"])
    unique_vals, val_counts = np.unique(nonzero_idx[2], return_counts=True)
    val_counts / val_counts.sum()




.. parsed-literal::

    array([0.70041609, 0.29958391])



But this is array representation is not good for visualization. We can
use the ``hex_pxls_to_human_readable`` method of the retina to convert
it into a normal [0, 256) 8-bit RGB image that can be plotted. We set
``color_8bit`` to True to process the 8-bit color representation more
efficiently and return the output as an integer ranged from 0 to 255. We
will further take the grayscale image (disregard yellow- vs pale-type
ommatidia) by taking the maximum along the last dimension, ie. that of
color channels.

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    vision_left = nmf.retina.hex_pxls_to_human_readable(
        obs["vision"][0, :, :], color_8bit=True
    )
    vision_left = vision_left.max(axis=-1)
    vision_right = nmf.retina.hex_pxls_to_human_readable(
        obs["vision"][1, :, :], color_8bit=True
    )
    vision_right = vision_right.max(axis=-1)
    
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(6, 3), tight_layout=True)
    axs[0].imshow(vision_left, cmap="gray", vmin=0, vmax=255)
    axs[0].axis("off")
    axs[0].set_title("Left eye")
    axs[1].imshow(vision_right, cmap="gray", vmin=0, vmax=255)
    axs[1].axis("off")
    axs[1].set_title("Right eye")
    fig.savefig("./outputs/vision_sim.png")



.. figure :: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/vision_sim.png?raw=true
   :width: 600


Since ``render_raw_vision`` is set to True in the parameters, we can
access the raw RGB vision through the ``info`` dictionary before pixels
are binned into ommatidia:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    fig, axs = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(6, 3), tight_layout=True)
    axs[0].imshow(info["raw_vision"][0, :, :, :].astype(np.uint8))
    axs[0].axis("off")
    axs[0].set_title("Left eye")
    axs[1].imshow(info["raw_vision"][1, :, :, :].astype(np.uint8))
    axs[1].axis("off")
    axs[1].set_title("Right eye")
    fig.savefig("./outputs/vision_sim_raw.png")



.. figure :: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/vision_sim_raw.png?raw=true
   :width: 600

We observe that the ommatidia covering the blue and the green pillars
seem to have a bimodal distribution in intensity. This is because the
ommatidia are stochastically split into yellow- and pale-types, and they
have different sensitivities to different colors.

A dynamic arena with a moving sphere
------------------------------------

The next step is to create a custom arena with a moving sphere. To do
this, we will implement a ``MovingObjArena`` class that inherits from
the ``flygym.mujoco.arena.BaseArena`` class. A complete, functioning
implementation of this class is provided under
``flygym.mujoco.examples.vision`` on the `FlyGym
repository <https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/flygym/blob/main/flygym/mujoco/examples/vision.py>`__.
We start by defining some attributes in its ``__init__`` method:

.. code:: python

   class MovingObjArena(BaseArena):
       """Flat terrain with a hovering moving object.

       Attributes
       ----------
       arena : mjcf.RootElement
           The arena object that the terrain is built on.
       ball_pos : Tuple[float,float,float]
           The position of the floating object in the arena.

       Parameters
       ----------
       size : Tuple[int, int]
           The size of the terrain in (x, y) dimensions.
       friction : Tuple[float, float, float]
           Sliding, torsional, and rolling friction coefficients, by default
           (1, 0.005, 0.0001)
       obj_radius : float
           Radius of the spherical floating object in mm.
       obj_spawn_pos : Tuple[float,float,float]
           Initial position of the object, by default (0, 2, 1).
       move_direction : str
           Which way the ball moves toward first. Can be "left", "right", or
           "random".
       move_speed : float
           Speed of the moving object.
       """

       def __init__(
           self,
           size: Tuple[float, float] = (300, 300),
           friction: Tuple[float, float, float] = (1, 0.005, 0.0001),
           obj_radius: float = 1,
           init_ball_pos: Tuple[float, float] = (5, 0),
           move_speed: float = 8,
           move_direction: str = "right",
       ):
           self.init_ball_pos = (*init_ball_pos, obj_radius)
           self.ball_pos = np.array(self.init_ball_pos, dtype="float32")
           self.friction = friction
           self.move_speed = move_speed
           self.curr_time = 0
           self.move_direction = move_direction
           if move_direction == "left":
               self.y_mult = 1
           elif move_direction == "right":
               self.y_mult = -1
           elif move_direction == "random":
               self.y_mult = np.random.choice([-1, 1])
           else:
               raise ValueError("Invalid move_direction")
       
           ...

Next, we define a ``root_element`` attribute. The simulated world is
represented as a tree of objects, each attached to a parent. For
example, the eyes of the fly are attached to the head, which is in turn
attached to the thorax — the base of the NeuroMechFly model. Note that
this tree is merely a representation of objects and their relation to
each other; there does not necessarily have to be a visual or anatomical
link between the parent and child objects. For example, the base of the
NeuroMechFly model — the thorax — is attached to the world, but the link
between the thorax and the world is a free joint, meaning that it is
free to move in all 6 degrees of freedom. The root element is the root
of this tree.

.. code:: python

           ...

           self.root_element = mjcf.RootElement()

           ...

Then, we will add the moving sphere. It will be attached to the root
element:

.. code:: python

           ...
           
           # Add ball
           obstacle = self.root_element.asset.add(
               "material", name="obstacle", reflectance=0.1
           )
           self.root_element.worldbody.add(
               "body", name="ball_mocap", mocap=True, pos=self.ball_pos, gravcomp=1
           )
           self.object_body = self.root_element.find("body", "ball_mocap")
           self.object_body.add(
               "geom",
               name="ball",
               type="sphere",
               size=(obj_radius, obj_radius),
               rgba=(0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 1),
               material=obstacle,
           )

           ...

Let’s also add some cameras so we can visualize the scene from different
angles. This concludes the definition of our ``__init__`` method.

.. code:: python

           ...

           # Add camera
           self.birdeye_cam = self.root_element.worldbody.add(
               "camera",
               name="birdeye_cam",
               mode="fixed",
               pos=(15, 0, 35),
               euler=(0, 0, 0),
               fovy=45,
           )
           self.birdeye_cam_zoom = self.root_element.worldbody.add(
               "camera",
               name="birdeye_cam_zoom",
               mode="fixed",
               pos=(15, 0, 20),
               euler=(0, 0, 0),
               fovy=45,
           )

Next, let’s define a ``get_spawn_position`` class. This is applies an
offset to the user-defined fly spawn position. For example, if there is
a stage in your arena that is 1 mm high, and you want to place the fly on
this stage, then you might want to apply a transformation to the
user-specified relative spawn position and return
``rel_pos + np.array([0, 0, 1])`` as the effective spawn position. In
our case, we have a flat arena, so we will just return the spawn
position and orientation as is:

.. code:: python

       def get_spawn_position(self, rel_pos, rel_angle):
           return rel_pos, rel_angle

The arena also has a ``step`` method. Usually, in static arenas, this is
left empty. However, since we want the sphere to move in our arena, we
need to implement this method so the sphere is moved appropriately every
step of the simulation:

.. code:: python

       def step(self, dt, physics):
           heading_vec = np.array([1, 2 * np.cos(self.curr_time * 3) * self.y_mult])
           heading_vec /= np.linalg.norm(heading_vec)
           self.ball_pos[:2] += self.move_speed * heading_vec * dt
           physics.bind(self.object_body).mocap_pos = self.ball_pos
           self.curr_time += dt

Finally, let’s implement a ``reset`` method:

.. code:: python

       def reset(self, physics):
           if self.move_direction == "random":
               self.y_mult = np.random.choice([-1, 1])
           self.curr_time = 0
           self.ball_pos = np.array(self.init_ball_pos, dtype="float32")
           physics.bind(self.object_body).mocap_pos = self.ball_pos

Visual feature preprocessing
----------------------------

We will preprocess the visual feature by computing the x-y position of
the object on the retina along with its size relative to the whole
retinal image. We do this by applying binary thresholding to the image
and calculating its size and center of mass. This is a good example to
once again showcase the benefit of encapsulating preprogrammed logic
into the Markov Decision Process (implemented as a Gym environment). If
you haven’t, read the tutorial on `building a turning
controller <https://neuromechfly.org/tutorials/turning.html>`__ to see
how this is done.

Recall that in the ``HybridTurningController``, we implemented the
purple arrow in the following figure, encapsulating the CPG network and
the sensory feedback-based correction rules:

.. figure :: https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/blob/main/flygym/mdp.png?raw=true
   :width: 600

Here, we will build yet another layer on top of
``HybridTurningController``, implementing the aforementioned sensory
preprocessing logic (cyan arrow) and encapsulating it inside the new
MDP. As before, a complete, functioning implementation of this class is
provided under ``flygym.mujoco.examples.vision`` on the `FlyGym
repository <https://github.com/NeLy-EPFL/flygym/blob/main/flygym/mujoco/examples/vision.py>`__.

We start by defining an ``__init__`` method. This time, we will specify
the threshold used in the binary thresholding step. Any pixel darker
than this number will be considered part of the black sphere. We will
also define a decision interval :math:`\tau`: the turning signal is
recomputed every :math:`\tau` seconds. We will compute the center of
mass (COM) of all ommatidia so that later when we need to compute the
COM of the object (a masked subset of pixels), we can simply take the
average of the COMs of the selected pixels. Finally, we will override
the definition of the observation space with a 6-dimensional one (x, y
positions of the object per side, plus the relative size of the object
per side).

.. code:: python

   class VisualTaxis(HybridTurningNMF):
       def __init__(self, obj_threshold=0.15, decision_interval=0.05, **kwargs):
           super().__init__(**kwargs)

           self.obj_threshold = obj_threshold
           self.decision_interval = decision_interval
           self.num_substeps = int(self.decision_interval / self.timestep)
           self.visual_inputs_hist = []

           self.coms = np.empty((self.retina.num_ommatidia_per_eye, 2))
           for i in range(self.retina.num_ommatidia_per_eye):
               mask = self.retina.ommatidia_id_map == i + 1
               self.coms[i, :] = np.argwhere(mask).mean(axis=0)
           
           self.observation_space = spaces.Box(0, 1, shape=(6,))

Next, let’s implement the visual preprocessing logic discussed above:

.. code:: python

       def _process_visual_observation(self, raw_obs):
           features = np.zeros((2, 3))
           for i, ommatidia_readings in enumerate(raw_obs["vision"]):
               is_obj = ommatidia_readings.max(axis=1) < self.obj_threshold
               is_obj_coords = self.coms[is_obj]
               if is_obj_coords.shape[0] > 0:
                   features[i, :2] = is_obj_coords.mean(axis=0)
               features[i, 2] = is_obj_coords.shape[0]
           features[:, 0] /= self.retina.nrows  # normalize y_center
           features[:, 1] /= self.retina.ncols  # normalize x_center
           features[:, 2] /= self.retina.num_ommatidia_per_eye  # normalize area
           return features.flatten()

In the ``step`` method, we will replace the raw observation with the
output of the ``_process_visual_observation`` method. We will also
record the retina images every time the simulation renders a frame for
the recorded video. This way, we can visualize the retina images along
with the recorded video later:

.. code:: python

       def step(self, control_signal):
           for _ in range(self.num_substeps):
               raw_obs, _, _, _, _ = super().step(control_signal)
               render_res = super().render()
               if render_res is not None:
                   # record visual inputs too because they will be played in the video
                   self.visual_inputs_hist.append(raw_obs["vision"].copy())
           visual_features = self._process_visual_observation(raw_obs)
           return visual_features, 0, False, False, {}

Finally, we implement the ``reset`` method:

.. code:: python

       def reset(self, seed=0, **kwargs):
           raw_obs, _ = super().reset(seed=seed)
           return self._process_visual_observation(raw_obs), {}

Implementing a object tracking controller
-----------------------------------------

Now that we have implemented the arena and the new Gym environment, we
just need to define the actual controller logic that outputs the 2D
descending representation based on the extracted visual features. As a
proof-of-concept, we have hand-tuned the following relationship:

.. math::


   \delta_i = \begin{cases}
   \min(\max(k a_i + b, \delta_\text{min}), \delta_\text{max})   & \text{if } A_i > A_\text{thr} \\
   1  & \text{otherwise}
   \end{cases}

where :math:`\delta_i` is the descending modulation signal on side
:math:`i`; :math:`a_i` is the azimuth of the object expressed as the
deviation from the anterior edge of the eye’s field of view, normalized
by the horizontal field of view of the retina; :math:`A_i` is the
relative size of the object on the arena; :math:`k=-3`, :math:`b=1` are
parameters describing the response curve; :math:`\delta_\text{min}=0.2`,
:math:`\delta_\text{max}=1` describe the range of the descending signal;
:math:`A_\text{thr} = 1\%` is the threshold below which the object is
considered unseen from the eye.

Before we implement this in the main simulation loop, let’s instantiate
our arena and Gym environment:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    from flygym.mujoco.examples.vision import MovingObjArena, VisualTaxis
    
    obj_threshold = 0.15
    decision_interval = 0.05
    contact_sensor_placements = [
        f"{leg}{segment}"
        for leg in ["LF", "LM", "LH", "RF", "RM", "RH"]
        for segment in ["Tibia", "Tarsus1", "Tarsus2", "Tarsus3", "Tarsus4", "Tarsus5"]
    ]
    arena = MovingObjArena()
    sim_params = Parameters(
        render_camera="birdeye_cam",
        render_playspeed=0.5,
        render_window_size=(800, 608),
        enable_adhesion=True,
        enable_vision=True,
    )
    nmf = VisualTaxis(
        obj_threshold=obj_threshold,
        decision_interval=decision_interval,
        sim_params=sim_params,
        arena=arena,
        contact_sensor_placements=contact_sensor_placements,
    )

As before, let’s check if this environment complies with the Gym
interface. Despite a few warnings on design choices, no errors should be
raised.

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    check_env(nmf)


.. parsed-literal::

    /opt/homebrew/Caskroom/miniforge/base/envs/flygym0.2/lib/python3.11/site-packages/gymnasium/utils/env_checker.py:247: UserWarning: WARN: For Box action spaces, we recommend using a symmetric and normalized space (range=[-1, 1] or [0, 1]). See https://stable-baselines3.readthedocs.io/en/master/guide/rl_tips.html for more information.
      logger.warn(
    /opt/homebrew/Caskroom/miniforge/base/envs/flygym0.2/lib/python3.11/site-packages/gymnasium/utils/env_checker.py:125: UserWarning: WARN: The default seed argument in reset should be `None`, otherwise the environment will by default always be deterministic. Actual default: 0
      logger.warn(
    /opt/homebrew/Caskroom/miniforge/base/envs/flygym0.2/lib/python3.11/site-packages/gymnasium/utils/passive_env_checker.py:175: UserWarning: WARN: The default seed argument in `Env.reset` should be `None`, otherwise the environment will by default always be deterministic. Actual default: seed=0
      logger.warn(
    /opt/homebrew/Caskroom/miniforge/base/envs/flygym0.2/lib/python3.11/site-packages/gymnasium/utils/env_checker.py:321: UserWarning: WARN: Not able to test alternative render modes due to the environment not having a spec. Try instantialising the environment through gymnasium.make
      logger.warn(


Now, we implement the main simulation loop:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    def calc_ipsilateral_speed(deviation, is_found):
        if not is_found:
            return 1.0
        else:
            return np.clip(1 - deviation * 3, 0.2, 1.0)
    
    
    num_substeps = int(decision_interval / sim_params.timestep)
    
    obs_hist = []
    deviations_hist = []
    control_signal_hist = []
    
    obs, _ = nmf.reset()
    for i in trange(70):
        left_deviation = 1 - obs[1]
        right_deviation = obs[4]
        left_found = obs[2] > 0.01
        right_found = obs[5] > 0.01
        if not left_found:
            left_deviation = np.nan
        if not right_found:
            right_deviation = np.nan
        control_signal = np.array(
            [
                calc_ipsilateral_speed(left_deviation, left_found),
                calc_ipsilateral_speed(right_deviation, right_found),
            ]
        )
    
        obs, _, _, _, _ = nmf.step(control_signal)
        obs_hist.append(obs)
        deviations_hist.append([left_deviation, right_deviation])
        control_signal_hist.append(control_signal)


.. parsed-literal::

    100%|██████████| 70/70 [02:33<00:00,  2.19s/it]


To inspect the recorded video:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    nmf.save_video("./outputs/object_following.mp4")


.. raw:: html

   <video src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/main/flygym/object_following.mp4" controls="controls" style="max-width: 500px;"></video>


We can use the ``save_video_with_vision_insets`` utility function to
regenerate this video, but with insets at the bottom illustrating the visual
experience of the fly:

.. code-block:: ipython3
    :linenos:

    from flygym.mujoco.vision.visualize import save_video_with_vision_insets
    
    save_video_with_vision_insets(
        nmf, "./outputs/object_following_with_retina_images.mp4", nmf.visual_inputs_hist
    )


.. parsed-literal::

    WARNING:imageio_ffmpeg:IMAGEIO FFMPEG_WRITER WARNING: input image is not divisible by macro_block_size=16, resizing from (800, 763) to (800, 768) to ensure video compatibility with most codecs and players. To prevent resizing, make your input image divisible by the macro_block_size or set the macro_block_size to 1 (risking incompatibility).

.. raw:: html

   <video src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/NeLy-EPFL/_media/main/flygym/object_following_with_retina_images.mp4" controls="controls" style="max-width: 500px;"></video>